add how-to guide for typescript graphql consumer (#49)
DiamondLightSource/graph-federation: docs/how-tos/typescript_consume.md

# TypeScript Consumer

## Preface

> This guide will explain how to fetch data from a GraphQL endpoint and map the response to a TypeScript model using Relay.

Reviewer: Probably worth linking to `Relay` here

We will cover:

- Setting up the Relay Environment in [Setup Relay Environment](#setup-relay-environment)
- Generating the TypeScipt types with Relay in [Generate TypeScript Types](#generate-typescript-types)
- Fetching data using Relay in [Fetch Data Using Relay](#fetch-data-using-relay)
- Mapping the response to TypeScript types in [Mapping the response](#mapping-the-response)

> !!! note "Alternative Options"

Reviewer: `info` may be more appropriate here

    If you are looking for alternative GraphQL clients, you may consider:

    - [`graffle`](https://graffle.js.org/) for simpler setup
    - [`Apollo Client`](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react) for more features
    - [`TypeGraphQL`](https://typegraphql.com/) if you require decorators and more advanced GraphQL server setups

## Dependencies

This guide assumes you have already set up Relay in your project. Relay is highly integrated with React, so you’ll also need the following packages:

- `react-relay` for React integration with Relay
- `relay-runtime` for core Relay functionality
- `babel-plugin-relay` for compiling Relay queries

## Setup Relay Environment

> We initially have to setup a Relay environment that helps the Relay to access the GraphQL endpoint.

Reviewer: This just didn't read quite right to me, maybe something like this?

```suggestion
We initially must set up a Relay environment which allows Relay to access the GraphQL endpoint.
```

In the root of `src` we create a `RelayEnvironment.ts`. In this file we are setup up a Relay environment for making GraphQL requests.

> The fetchFn function sends a POST request to the GraphQL endpoint with the query and variables, and processes the response.

Reviewer: Might be nice to give a quick reason for why a `fetchFn` exists - i.e. to abstract over a given networking stack and allow things like rate limiting. I'm surprised they don't provide a default one that uses `fetch` and `JSON.stringify` though

```suggestion
The `fetchFn` function sends a `POST` request to the GraphQL endpoint with the query and variables, and processes the response.
```

The `createRelayEnvironment` function initializes the Relay environment by combining the network layer (responsible for fetching data) and the store (which caches the data).

!!! example "RelayEnvironment.ts"

    ```typescript
    import {
        Environment,
        Network,
        RecordSource,
        Store,
        FetchFunction,
    } from "relay-runtime";

    const HTTP_ENDPOINT = "http://127.0.0.1:8000/graphql"; // assuming you are running any of the services from how to guides

    const fetchFn: FetchFunction = async (request, variables) => {
        const response = await fetch(HTTP_ENDPOINT, {
            method: "POST",
            headers: {
                "Content-Type": "application/json",
            },
            body: JSON.stringify({
                query: request.text,
                variables,
            }),
        });

        return await response.json();
    };

>     function createRelayEnvironment() {
>         return new Environment({
>         network: Network.create(fetchFn),
>         store: new Store(new RecordSource()),
>         });
>     }

Reviewer: Indentation doesn't quite look right here

```suggestion
    function createRelayEnvironment() {
        return new Environment({
            network: Network.create(fetchFn),
            store: new Store(new RecordSource()),
        });
    }
```

    export const RelayEnvironment = createRelayEnvironment();

    ```

!!! info

    Refer to the [Relay Environment Docs](https://relay.dev/docs/v1.6.2/relay-environment/) to learn more.

## Generate TypeScript Types

> Relay generated TypeScript types automatically for your queries, based on the GraphQL schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relay generates TypeScript types automatically for your queries, based on the GraphQL schema.
```

> For examples, if you are querying a Person type form the GraphQL schema, Relay will generate types for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you are querying a Person type form the GraphQL schema, Relay will generate types for you.
```

!!! example "GraphQL Query"

    ```graphql
    query PersonQuery {
        person {
            id
            firstName
            lastName
        }
    }

>     ```

Reviewer: This can be put as an inline block since the text refers directly to it

Relay will automatically generate a TypeScript type for this Query when you run the Relay compiler.

!!! example "Generated Type"

    ```typescript
    // __generated__/PersonQuery.graphql.ts

    export interface PersonQuery {
        person: {
            id: string;
            firstName: string;
            lastName: string;
        } | null;
    }

>     ```

Reviewer: Same here

## Fetch Data Using Relay

> In Relay, you defing your GraphQL queries within components using the `useLazyLoadQuery` or `useFragment` hooks. Relay then fetched and managed data for you.

Reviewer: As Benedikt [recently pointed out](https://github.com/DiamondLightSource/graph-federation/pull/48#pullrequestreview-2340825957), it's nice to stick to we / our instead of switching to you / your in places. Also good to keep things in the future tense if that's what we're going with throughout

```suggestion
In Relay, we define our GraphQL queries within components using the `useLazyLoadQuery` or `useFragment` hooks. Relay then fetches and manages data for you.
```

To fetch data, we define a query in our component and use Relay's `useLazyLoadQuery` hook to execute it. The query is defined using the GraphQL tag provided by `babel-plugin-relay`.

!!! example "Fetch Data with Relay"

>     ```ts

Reviewer: Does `ts` work? Or does it need to be `typescript`?

Author: `ts` works

    import { graphql, useLazyLoadQuery } from "react-relay";
    import { PersonQuery } from './__generated__/PersonQuery.graphql'; // generated by relay compiler

    const PersonComponent = () => {
        const data = useLazyLoadQuery<PersonQuery>(
            graphql`
            query PersonQuery {
                person {
                id
                firstName
                lastName
                }
            }
            `,
            {}
        );
        if (!data.person) {
            return <div>Loading...</div>;
        }
        return (
            <div>
                <h1>{data.person.firstName} {data.person.lastName}</h1>
            </div>
        );
    };

    export default PersonComponent;
    ```

## Mapping the Response

> With Relay, you don't need to manually map the response to TypeSciprt models as the Relay handles this internally and generated types for each query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Relay, you don't need to manually map the response to TypeScript models as the Relay handles this internally and generates types for each query.
```

Relay will ensure the data conforms to the types defined in your GraphQL schema.

> It will map the response to the PersonQuery type and ensure that your TypeScript code only access the field that match the GraphQL schema, such as id, firstName and lastName.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will map the response to the PersonQuery type and ensure that your TypeScript code only access the fields that match the GraphQL schema, such as id, firstName and lastName.
```
